Infrastructure as code is a rather revolutionary development in the tech
world. Cloudformation being the major IaC format for AWS.

As I'm learning Cloudformation I'm having a fair amount of issues
finding clear concise documentation explaining WHY things are the way
they are, rather than just providing an example template with a few
sentences summarizing the template. There's a lot of wrappers around CF
itself like serverless, troposhphere, and more. These help by making CF
easier to work with.   I'm hoping to make a wrapper around the AWS doc's
to make them easier to work with.

My goal is to document all of learning as I go from noob to pro and
write the docs I wish I had to hopefully turn a really cool tool like CF
into English for the rest of us. If there are any issues or places that
I can update these guides to make things clearer, please leave a comment
or email and let me know how I can improve these docs.

**Section 1-the template format**
---------------------------------

The basic framework for CF templates is actually pretty simple. It's a
single file, called a template, that you use to build up an entire set
of AWS resources, called a stack. A single template could define a
single server in the stack or a template could define an entire
infrastructure stack, with everything needed to make a complex
enterprise system from various AWS offerings, including load balancers,
autoscalers, lambdas, and more.

The templates can be defined in either JSON or YML format and the
syntactic sugar is different but the content is the same. I'm going to
use JSON in these guides because I prefer it, but either is perfectly
acceptable and the ideas should translate seamlessly between the two.

The basic CF template can be broken up into several subsections.

    {
        "AWSTemplateFormatVersion" : "2010-09-09",
        "Description" : "JSON string",
        "Parameters" : {
           set of parameters
        },
        "Mappings" : {
           set of mappings
        },
        "Conditions" : {
           set of conditions
        },
        "Resources" : {
           set of resources
        },
        "Outputs" : {
          set of outputs
        }
    }

We shall get to all of these sections as we go along, but a brief
breakdown is as follows.

**AWS template version: **this is not a custom date that you define.
This is a specific versioning of AWS template represented by a date. It
defines the capabilities of the template. The funny part, after reading
the docs, is that the only allowable value for this section
is: *"2010-09-09" *

-   Template versioning
    info: [Link](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/format-version-structure.html)

**Description:**  A custom description of your template/stack.

**Parameters**: define values that you pass to your templates at
runtime. You can pass in IP address ranges, names of things, and a lot
more.  Using these properly will go a long way to making your templates
super reusable.

**Mappings**:  A series of key/value pairs you can use within your
templates. As you'll see, these can be, and are often, nested so that
you can have multiple levels of key/value pairings.

**Conditions**: a set of conditions you can use to test against, for
example, when creating different environments you can define conditions
that creates smaller servers for development and larger servers for
production.

**Resources**: The actual AWS offerings are defined in this section.

**Outputs**: Values that you return after running your template.

Note: There's another section not included called **Transforms**  used
for specialty templates when creating serverless applications with the
SAM DSL. I haven't used this yet but plan on documenting it when I do.

 

**Section 2 - the keywords**
----------------------------

This is the actual language that you use to build your cloud formation
templates. This can be compared to the syntax of programming languages
i.e. the reserved words you use to write your code.

The entire template reference is located
here: [Link](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/template-reference.html)

The two keyword types you will be using the most are:

-   Resources
    -   These are all of the built in AWS offerings you find in the
        console control panel.
    -   Examples are: EC2, Kinesis, SNS, etc
    -   There are quite a few. The entire list is located
        here: [Link](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-template-resource-type-ref.html). 
        Bookmark it because you will be using it ALOT.
-   Intrinsic Functions
    -   These are helper functions.
    -   These are utility functions to be used within the template
        itself.
    -   They do things like access parameters or test conditionals or
        format text.
    -   The full list is located
        here: [Link](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/intrinsic-function-reference.html)

**Section 3-running the template**
----------------------------------

Once you have finished writing your templates, there are two ways to run
the templates to create your stack within AWS.

1.  Cloudformation tool inside of the AWS console
2.  AWS CLI.

You should definitely get acquainted with both because they both offer
useful tools to develop and troubleshoot your templates.

**AWS CLI**

Poke around the docs here to figure out how to set up the AWS
CLI: [Link](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/installing.html)

-   Note a significant gotcha when setting up the CLI is to be sure you
    set the output to JSON not TEXT!

Useful commands for CRUD inside of the AWS CLI are:

-   **aws cloudformation create-stack**
-   **aws cloudformation delete-stack**
-   **aws cloudformation update-stack**
-   **aws cloudformation validate-template**
    -   Note: validate-template simply does a cursory validation of the
        template, more of a JSON linting than an in depth validation
        that your template configuration is correct. (This needs more
        research as to what exactly it does.)
    -   Use it to find general formatting errors.
    -   For more info, see:
        [Here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/using-cfn-validate-template.html)

Useful command for describing and troubleshooting stacks are:

-   **aws cloudformation list-stacks **
-   **aws cloudformation describe-stack-events **
-   **aws cloudformation describe-stacks**

**Cloudformation Console**

There's a lot of tools in the CF console to work with CF templates. I've
only used the CLI so far to create templates, but it looks pretty
straightforward to create a stack by uploading a template to the CF
console.

What I've found to be very useful is using the console to troubleshoot,
once I've created my stack from the CLI.  After running a create from
the CLI you will see the stack appear in the console, and if there's
errors during the creation of the stack, you can click on that stack,
and drill down into an stack trace of what went wrong during stack
creation. Super useful and we'll revisit this.

Fini
----

The goal of this first post was to set the foundation of the basic tools
that will be used in future posts and describe the basic anatomy of CF
templates. From here on out hopefully will just be actually hands on
creation of templates.  Thanks for reading. Tune in next time for
creating our first template!