**Part 1 - Make an s3 bucket**
------------------------------

Here's your first template to create a basic s3 bucket.  I'm going to
post the template then do a little discussion about it.

my-first-cf-template.json **{** **   "AWSTemplateFormatVersion":
"2010-09-09",** **   "Description": "We doin it",** **   "Resources":
{** **      "S3Bucket": {** **            "Type": "AWS::S3::Bucket",**
**            "Properties": {** **                    "BucketName": "My
First Cloudformation Bucket"** **             }** **         }** ** 
 }** **}**

The version and the description attributes are just boilerplate that we
use in every template. The description is our custom description and the
version is the same in every template(currently, see part 1 of this
series), just copy/paste that bad boy.

The only sub-section we have in this template at the moment, for
simplicity, is the Resources section which we discussed in the last post
as being the section where the AWS offerings are defined. Notice the
structure of a resource inside of the "Resources" section.

**"Custom Name Of Resource": {** **            "Type":
"AWS::SOME::Resource",** **            "Properties": {** **             
      "SomeAttribute": "SomeValue"** **             }** **         }**

The name of the resource is actually completely custom.  This name is
like the name of a class in programming. You make it as readable as
possible, and you will be using it in other parts of the template.

The "Type" section is simply the name of the AWS offering that this
resource is creating.

The "Properties" section is common to all resources as well. There are
typically multiple required props inside of this section and multiple
optional props as well. This section's format is specific to each
resource and, in describing the resource, gets incredibly nested,
detailed, and complex.

That pretty much sums up the big picture of resource definition.

The keyword to define an s3 bucket is AWS::S3::Bucket. Here's the
complete docs for the s3 cloudformer
resource: [Link.](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-properties-s3-bucket.html)
There are a ton of options for all resources, however, only a tiny
subset of those options are typically required.

Now create this template file on your computer somewhere, navigate to
the directory in which it's contained, and run this command on it:

**aws cloudformation create-stack --stack-name simple-s3 --template-body
file://my-first-cf-template.json**

-   Note: the**file://**  here is very important. Without it you will
    get an error saying:** "Template format error: unsupported
    structure."  **which is not the worlds most clear error.

Now, once the command has been run you should get a response back from
the command line like this:

**{** **    "StackId":
"arn:aws:cloudformation:us-west-1:12320988:stack/simple-s3/somelongrandostring"**
**}**

This means things are good so far!  Right?

Now, go to your browser, and navigate to your AWS console and go to the
cloudformation service.

You should see something like this.![Screen Shot 2018-10-02 at 11.33.00
AM](img/screen-shot-2018-10-02-at-11-33-00-am.png)

Oh Snap! Something is wrong!  You can see the stack we just created from
the template has a status that is bright crimson red and says
ROLLBACK\_IN\_PROGRESS. Ohnoes!  What happened here?

I made this first template incorrect for several reasons.  First, to get
us comfortable with the numerous errors we will encounter in AWS
(numerous, some clear and some not so clear)..... and second to
demonstrate how useful the console is for troubleshooting stacks.

Now, if we click on the simple-s3 stack we can drill down into that
stack and get more information.

Drilling down we should see something like this.

![Screen Shot 2018-10-02 at 11.38.23
AM](./img//screen-shot-2018-10-02-at-11-38-23-am.png)

Apparently the [S3Bucket] resource failed to create. Not the clearest
error message, but in large stacks with large amounts of resources, 
this would help troubleshoot immensely by isolating to the singular
resource causing the error.

Now, if you do a quick google you can typically find a correct template
to create an s3 bucket and you will notice that there are no spaces in
the BucketName attribute. So remove all the spaces in this line,
converting this:

**BucketName": "My First Cloudformation Bucket"**

to this:

**BucketName": "my-first-cloudformation-bucket"**

Now you need to either:

-   delete the current stack
-   rename your new stack
-   update the current stack

I'm going to delete the current stack, and recreate it with the same
name, using the same command for consistency.

One way to delete the stack is via console:

![Screen Shot 2018-10-02 at 11.48.47
AM](img/screen-shot-2018-10-02-at-11-48-47-am.png)

Another way is using the command:

**aws cloudformation delete-stack --stack-name simple-s3**

You should see, by watching the console, that the stack takes a little
bit of time to delete, which can grow, depending on how big the stack
is.

Now rerun the create command on the modified template:

**aws cloudformation create-stack --stack-name simple-s3 --template-body
file://my-first-cf-template.json**

And re-navigate to the console and you should see something like this:

![Screen Shot 2018-10-02 at 11.51.34
AM.png](img/screen-shot-2018-10-02-at-11-51-34-am.png)

We are awesomely in business!

Now you should be able to Navigate to the s3 console panel and be able
to see our new bucket **my-first-cloudformation-bucket.**

 

Fini
----

In this post we went over creation of a simple s3 bucket template,
troubleshot our first error, and used the aws cli and console to both
create and delete stacks. In our next post we will go over some more of
the subsections of the CF template anatomy. Thanks for reading!